CRITICAL INTERFACE TOOLBOX

AN ONLINE RESOURCE FOR CRITICAL INTERFACE DESIGN

[https://crit.hangar.org/toolbox/]

THE CRITICAL INTERFACE TOOLBOX unfolds as an online resource that exposes experimental methodologies, practices, and tools aimed at enhancing critical thought towards the actual configuration of the Interface. These actions were developed within a year-long research project at HANGAR. This initiative is part of the European Consortium IMAGIT and fits in with the research and actions developed at the Interface Manifesto.

The interface is a device designed and used to facilitate the relationship between systems.

(To) interface is a verb (I interface, you interface ...). The interface occurs, is action.

The interface exists in the crease between space and time; it is a device and simultaneously a situation. It is rendered (updated under thoughtful conditions) and emergent (joining into something new).

The interface collects traces: traces and remains of all agents/agencies which converge in it.

The  interface is the tip of the iceberg of a complex system of agents/agencies, of  interdependent infrastructures, codes, data, applications,  laws, corporations, individuals, sounds, spaces, behaviors, objects, protocols, buttons, times, affects, effects, defects ...

An interface is designed within a cultural context and in turn designs cultural contexts.

The interface responds and embodies the economic logic of the system in which you enroll. It is a political device.

The ideology of the interface is always embedded in the interface itself, but it is not always visible.

Can we make the invisible visible? The more present interfaces are in our lives, the less we perceive them.

The interface uses metaphors that create illusions: I am free, I can go back, I have unlimited memory, I am anonymous, I am popular, I am creative, it's free, it's neutral, it is simple, it is universal. Beware of illusions!

The standard calls for a universal subject and generates processes of homogenization, but reduces the complexity and diversity . What is not standard?

Users are entitled to know what the interface hides. Access to knowledge is a fundamental right.

In the design of the interface, not only skills but also emotions and affections are deployed. How are emotions produced and circulated in interfaces?

The user uses the interface perform agency, they coproduce each other and therefore they have the ability to define, redefine and contradict themselve by action or omission.